>> Kyle Simpson: We've been throwing
around some concepts, and we wanna come
back and layer those in, if there have
been some things that maybe were missed.
If I have the value 42, and another
way of expressing a value that looks very
similar is to put some quotes around it.
These two values look like they are,
yeah, roughly the same.
If we were to print out both of them,
they would both print out in the same way.
They'd both say 42.
They'd have the literal characters 4 and
2 after each other.
But they are going to behave
differently in our JavaScript program.
And that is because these values
are intrinsically of different types.
And that word type,
we don't mean physically putting
your fingers on keys on a keyboard.
We mean it is an intrinsic behavior
of the value as expressed.
So this 42 that we see
on line 1 is a number.
And the 42 is what we call a string.
And numbers have different behavior
associated with them than strings do.
So, for example,
numbers are what we do math with.
We can say 42 divided by 2,
and that gives us 21.
Strings are what we do input and
output with.
Strings are also how we
deal with characters.
So, if I wanted to say what is
the first character of the string "42",
that [0] could tell me that the first
character of it is the character "4".
So the character "4" is the first
character in the string "42".
Just like if I had a string "abc",
the character at the 1 position
is the character b, okay?
Strings are accessing things
character by character.
Numbers are what we do math with.
These different intrinsic behaviors
are important to keep in mind.
Because if I express the number
42 in my JavaScript program,
I am signaling that I intend to
use that in a mathematic way.
And if I instead express
"42" in my program,
I am expressing that I intend to
use that in a string way, yeah?
>> Speaker 2: Is the use of single
versus double quotes important?
>> Kyle Simpson: In JavaScript,
strings can either be double quotes or
single quotes.
You can't have double quote on
the beginning and single quote on the end.
It has to match.
But they can either be double quotes or
single quotes in terms of your
de-limiting of a string literal.
There is no difference whatsoever
functionally in JavaScript.
In fact, stylistically the only
arguments that can ever be made are some
people prefer the single quote
because it's less keystrokes for them,
they do not have to hit Shift.
Other people prefer the double
quote because it's more natural
that they've done that in other languages.
And it's purely a stylistic thing.
Here's what I would say, never, ever mix.
Do not have part of your
program using single quotes and
part of your program using double quotes.
Pick one, and I really don't care which.
You can pick whichever one you want,
there's no difference, but pick one and
stick with that consistently
throughout your program.
You will see that I prefer double quotes.
I use double quotes.
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay.
[COUGH]
>> Kyle Simpson: These values have these
different types.
So if I said var a = 42,
I've got 42 that's in an a variable.
Let me take off the var part
just to not confuse that now.
So I'm just making an assignment.
The a variable's gonna have the 42 in it.
And if I wanted to print it out,
I can say, console.log(a).
And you'll notice that the JavaScript
engine does print that out.
If we try this program,
>> Kyle Simpson: You'll
notice that see 42.
But what happens if I send a = "42",
and then I said console.log(a)?
>> Kyle Simpson: It's very subtle and
difficult even on the projector to tell.
But this one is printed
in blue characters, and
this one is printed in black characters.
Because the console is giving you
a very subtle hint that underlying what
it's done, it was dealing with
the different value type.
So it's important to understand.
And it's not really incorrect in the book,
but
there is a slightly misleading thing that
I'm gonna correct in a second edition.
When it talks about console.log,
it suggests that console.log
changes everything to a string.
Actually, it doesn't really change it to a
string when you're running inside of your
JavaScript engine,
it just prints out whatever thing you had.
So that's why we see a slightly
different representation there.
Which is what I meant, there are other
contexts that change things into strings.
So, for example, saying alert(42), or
a variable with that number in it,
changes it into a string so
that it can print it in the box.
So we can't tell any difference inside of
an alert box, whether it had a number or
a string, but we know under the covers
it needed a string to do it.
So it actually converted into a string.
>> Kyle Simpson: So if I wanted
the string representation of this value,
if I had it as a number and maybe then I
later did some division, I said a = a / 2.
So now we know a is holding the value 21.
And if I then wanted to do something
string oriented with it, like output, or
getting at its character, or whatever,
I would need to convert it into a string.
Convert from one type to another.
And this conversion is common
in all programming languages.
All programming languages
have a notion of conversion.
In JavaScript, the word that
we use is slightly different.
It's not conversion, it is coercion.
And some people like to nit pick and say,
well, there's one thing that's conversion
in JavaScript and
another thing that's coercion.
I find it much easier to actually
distinguish between explicit and
implicit rather than conversion and
coercion.
So, an explicit conversion, one that it's
obvious that's what I'm trying to do,
if I wanted to turn a into
its string representation,
I could literally use the string function.
And that's gonna convert.
And if you have any experience in another
programming language where they do type
casting or other forms of conversion,
that looks very similar.
So I'm explicitly saying, take the thing
that's in a now, and if it's not a string,
make it look like a string, and
then assign that value back into a.
>> Kyle Simpson: So if we took this
program, if we put a console.log on it,
if we took that program and we ran it,
>> Kyle Simpson: Are we
expecting a blue number for the 21,
which would be that it's a number,
or are we expecting black characters for
21 cuz it's a string?
We'd be expecting black
because it's a string.
And in fact, we get black.
Again, it's really subtle on
the projector in the stream.
But this is black 21,
because it's actually a string
representation that I printed out.
Exactly the same as if I had
said console.log("Hello World").
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay?
All right, so strings serve a purpose in
programs differently than numbers do,
and converting between the two
is almost always required.
We saw that we could say a = String(a)
to convert from anything into a string.
If we wanted to go the other direction,
like go from a string to a number, like
if we had another variable called b and
we said b, then we could do the same
thing but with the number function.
We could say Number(a).
So now b is gonna be the number 21.
And a is gonna be the string quote 21
>> Kyle Simpson: There's
a question in the chat room
about changing things.
This is a subtle point, which I don't
wanna belabor too much, which we'll
actually get much more into when we
talk in the morning session of day two.
When we talk about coercions and
all that stuff in much, much more detail.
But, just as a brief answer, in
JavaScript, variables do not have types.
There's no such thing as
a variable having a type.
In JavaScript, the value has the type.
So the value 42 or the value quote
42 is the thing with the type.
And the variable,
the thing that we call a or
b, it has no type,
it can have any value of any type in it.
Whereas in other languages that
are called static languages,
those languages you don't
declare a type on the value so
much as you declare a type
on the variable itself.
So in C, for example, if I say int a,
I'm saying this variable container
must hold only ints, integers.
So I'm typing the variable itself rather
than worrying about the type of the value.
So it's just a distinction in JavaScript.
And in other dynamic value
languages like JavaScript,
we don't have a type for the variable,
we have a type for the value.
>> Kyle Simpson: The return of
a variable color code matters.
The only point that we are making here
is to understand if you're gonna program
inside of the console,
understanding what the console's doing.
It has special behaviors that are outside
of what JavaScript itself is doing.
So here I'm just helping you
understand that the console,
if you see blue characters, then the
console's telling you you had a number.
And if you see black characters, the
console's telling you you had a string.
That's just a subtle nuance
of working with the console,
it does not matter actually
to the JavaScript engine.
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay, so we're not gonna
do much more about coercions except for
me to suggest that those two
that I showed you before,
these are explicit, and
there are ways to do implicit coercions.
So a way to go from a number to a string
that is sort of a side effect
of some other operation,
that's what I mean by implicit,
it's not obvious that you're doing it.
So if I said something like,
right now we know a is the number 21.
If I said a is equal to
a + an empty string.
>> Kyle Simpson: Again, without getting
too much into the weeds about how the plus
operator works, in this case, the plus
operator wants to do string concatenation
instead of mathematic addition.
And because one of these things
is not already a string,
it has to make it into a string.
So under the covers it's gonna do that
string a thing that I was showing you.
But it's not obvious to
us that that's happening.
And yet, if we try this program and
do a console.log on that a variable, if we
try this program, we'll notice that we're
gonna get those black characters cuz it's
going to have made it into a string value.
Try that in your own console
to verify whether or
not you have that third line end or not.
You'll notice the difference
between getting black characters in
your console or getting blue characters.
Your question back there?
>> Speaker 3: Would there ever be a time
where you would want something to not
change so it would be a final?
And so even in an instance like
that it would give you an error,
let's say,
instead of converting it behind the scene?
Like you don't want that
to change in your program?
>> Kyle Simpson: There's a question in
the live room here about whether or
not there's a notion of wanting a variable
to have sort of a final value in it.
That is,
if you try to do something else and
assign it a different value,
it would throw you an error.
And there is actually that notion.
As of ES6, the newest, latest, and
greatest JavaScript that's coming out.
There's a notion, instead of using that
var keyword that I've talked about
a couple of times, you can use const
to create what's called a constant.
And other programming languages
also have a notion of a constant.
So that's getting a little
out of our topic, but
just to make sure we're clear on it.
If I said var a = 42, I'm making an a that
can be changed as many times as I want.
But if I said const a = 42, I'm making
an a that can never be changed again.
And if I do a = 10,
it will either silently fail or
actually throw me in error.
And that depends on strict mode,
which we may cover later.
But const is the way you make
a variable that can't be changed later.
And that's only in the newest
versions of JavaScript.